--- 
author: "Axel Segebrecht"
date: 2016-08-02
linktitle: How to stay safe online
menu:
  main:
    parent: 
next: 
prev: 
title: How to stay safe online
weight: 10
--- 

# How to stay safe online
![](How%20to%20stay%20safe%20online/https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2000/1*2o-_6T88iYDrkV8fpgdUDA.jpeg)
<span class=“figcaption_hack">Photo by [Varshesh Joshi](https://unsplash.com/@varshesh)</span>

## A quick guide for the paranoid and those aspiring to keep themselves protected
in a digital-first world.

In my experience there are three types of people:

1.  Those who don’t want to know about progress
1.  Those who do but are very cautious
1.  Those who jump in with both feet

#### Which type are you?

![](How%20to%20stay%20safe%20online/https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*zU8cfeXQqK3v_an86UKj2w.jpeg)

I am probably the third type although I use protection at all times, so I can
enjoy experimentation safely. I do this because I relish progress and have even
been recognised recently by my peers ;-0

However, jumping-in blindly without considering what could be happening can
quickly end up in lots of tears, or worse, cost you your livelihood. Especially
in a world where everything is run by computers, outcomes on everything from
your pension to groceries is determined by algorithms, your digital footprint
matters more than you may think. So tread carefully out there and be skeptical
when it comes to enjoying ‘free’ offers combining amazing value at no cost.

> If a service is free, you are likely the product they are making money from.  

“But Axel”, I hear you say, “surely big, global corporations wouldn’t put me at
risk?”. Actually, there are a few that happily sell you out, in fact it is their
business model.

#### Buyer Beware — you maybe sold

To keep this post within convenient matinee reading duration, I provide a list
of places to avoid if you value your privacy and don’t want to end up having
habits, routines, friends, personal information, etc shared:

Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter, Foursquare/Swarm, Gmail, Google, Outlook.com, AOL,
Yahoo!, Tumblr, Evernote ([find out
why](https://lawyerist.com/75157/evernote-secure-enough-client-data/) [it’s on
this list](http://michaelhyatt.com/is-your-data-safe-in-evernote.html)), Keepass
([read why it’s on this
list](https://www.engadget.com/2016/06/04/keepass-wont-fix-security-hole-due-to-ads/)),
many many more.

Most of these, especially Foursquare, have a business that sells data. Their
interest lies in getting you to part with as much of it as possible without
recognising by making it look like games or quizzes or just plain hide it.

Google’s model relies on the fact that if you cast wide enough a net and add
irresistible bait in form of high levels of free value, you can use this data to
sell your core service better— advertising.

[Microsoft has shown their colours
clearly](http://thenextweb.com/microsoft/2016/02/11/even-after-tweaking-your-privacy-settings-windows-10-is-still-a-privacy-nightmare/)
with the recent Windows 10 release and it’s lack of privacy protecting ‘cloud’
features. The defaults are still leaving you very exposed and benefit them more
than you.

Again, if the offer is free and you still get heaps of benefit, maybe — just
maybe — it is because you and your data is being sold.

#### Open Source and Privacy-friendly Alternatives

To provide balance and bring this little guide to a close, here is a list of
places where you can get your ‘fix’ of amazing value without cost and without
giving away your data.

If this sounds contrary to what I have just been writing about, you are
absolutely correct. Also, you are wrong.

> You can have your cake and eat it now.  

Thank you to a tireless group of wonderful people who have invested their time
and effort into open source projects and services supported by donations and
crowd funding, you do have an alternative to the big players. Just remember to
spare a moments thought (or perhaps a contribution too?) that without people
like this you would have to be of the first type I mentioned and become stuck.

Some also demonstrate that you can run a global business that is trading
ethically and for the benefit of the many, not just shareholders.

I provide a little table with my top recommendations split into categories.
Please don’t take this list as final or complete. Listing services does not
constitute any endorsement of them from me. I neither receive payment nor other
benefits from listing them here.

The list comprises both Open Source software and commercial, closed source
services.

#### Email: [Protonmail.ch](https://www.protonmail.ch/)

Free, encrypted and based outside the US and EU. Great user experience and
interface, even on mobile. Business and team plans available too. You can easily
send fully encrypted emails to anyone by email without them requiring special
software. You can even set them to self-destruct after a time. It comes with
address book and labels much like Gmail.

Runner-up: [Mail-in-box](https://mailinabox.email/) (self-hosted),
[Fastmail](https://www.fastmail.com/) (hosted, non-free, tip-of-hat to [Aral
Balkan](https://medium.com/u/b660a1c6a29b))

#### File sharing and cloud storage: [TresorIt.com](https://www.tresorit.com/)

This service is providing ‘zero knowledge’ encryption to keep your data fully
secured and offers a [1GB free plan](https://tresorit.com/pricing/comparison)
(updated link) as well as business paid plans. Nobody apart from you can see the
data — you hold the only key. So make sure you don’t loose this. You can
securely share files with others. TresorIt also [offer a reduced price to
NGOs](https://support.tresorit.com/hc/en-us/articles/217843688-Does-Tresorit-have-a-special-offer-for-NGOs-)
and not for profits enterprises.

Runner-up: [OwnCloud.com](https://www.owncloud.org/),
[NextCloud.com](https://nextcloud.com/) (tip-of-hat to
[Purism](https://medium.com/u/faba1b69bff7))

#### Chat and Messaging: [Telegram.org](https://www.telegram.org/)

Although there are now a few end-to-end encrypted chat apps, like WhatsApp,
Telegram remains the only one I know of that is fully open source and not run by
a large corporation or for profit. It has mobile apps and desktop apps, as well
as many features you have come accustomed to by other modern chat apps. Telegram
works pretty much with [any device or software](https://telegram.org/apps).

Runner-up: [iMessage](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201287) (Apple-only),
[Signal](https://whispersystems.org/) (tip-of-hat to [Aral
Balkan](https://medium.com/u/b660a1c6a29b), [Glenn
Rempe](https://medium.com/u/86be19b3dd8e))

#### Mobile / Smartphone: [Fairphone](https://www.fairphone.com/)

Most smartphones are build by huge global corporations, [using child
labour](http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35311456) and supplies from even less
ethical sources. It’s a big problem that remains mostly hidden and Apple,
Samsung et al are slow to address it because their profits rely on it. Having
said that, it applies to many more categories than mobile phones.

For food we have ‘fair trade’ and for technology we now have Fairphone. It’s a
fabulous, modular, open and ethical product run by [wonderful
people](https://www.fairphone.com/about/) who came together to provide [a real
alternative](http://www.theverge.com/2016/4/13/11414936/fairphone-2-review). It
runs [Linux or
Android](https://www.fairphone.com/2016/04/28/releasing-the-fairphone-2-open-operating-system/)
and you can fix it easily yourself if it should break or you can upgrade parts.

Runner-up: [Apple iPhone](http://www.apple.com/iphone/) (yes, really — thanks to
[Apple’s commitment to improving its supply
chain](https://www.greenbiz.com/article/meet-woman-leading-apples-supplier-sustainability-push)
and [treatment of workers](http://www.apple.com/supplier-responsibility/))

#### Mobile phone provider (UK): [giffgaff.com](https://www.giffgaff.com/)

Just a quick mention of an alternative to the large, faceless and often
low-value for money providers: giffgaff. It’s [a virtual
provider](https://www.giffgaff.com/about-us), running on O2 in the UK, that
strips out the stuff you hate and puts rewards and community front-end-center of
their business.

#### Operating System: Linux ([choose your
flavour](http://www.howtogeek.com/191207/10-of-the-most-popular-linux-distributions-compared/))

Linux has come a long way and remains the software of choice to run on computers
and devices of people that want to be in control. There are many variations and
you can easily find something that suits your purposes, along with thousands of
applications and games.

My favourite is [Debian](http://www.debian.org/), which one is yours? :)

Runner-up: [FreeBSD](https://www.freebsd.org/)

### Bonus

#### Content management: [Wordpress.org](https://wordpress.org/)

Chances are you have heard of this easy to use website content management system
before — [half of websites whose CMS we know run
it](https://w3techs.com/technologies/details/cm-wordpress/all/all).

#### Invoicing and billing: [InvoiceNinja.com](https://www.invoiceninja.com/)

An open source software you can host yourself or enjoy the free cloud service,
with a paid upgrade to even more features available also.

#### Project Management: [Taiga.io](https://taiga.io/)

Agile project management is how stuff gets done these days and Taiga let’s you
get yourself organised easily using a self-hosted software or cloud hosted
service.

#### Ad/Tracking Blocker: [Better](https://better.fyi/) (by
[ind.ie](https://ind.ie/)) (Apple only)

[Better](https://better.fyi/) is a tracker blocker for Safari on iPhone, iPad,
and Mac. It protects you from behavioural advertising and malicious web content
by enforcing the principles of [Ethical Design](https://ind.ie/ethical-design).
(tip-of-hat & thank you to [Aral Balkan](https://medium.com/u/b660a1c6a29b))

#### Social Networking: [ello](https://ello.co/)

The network for creatives and creators.

#### Computers: [Purism](https://puri.sm/)

Laptops and Tablets That Do Not Track You (tip-of-hat to[Aral
Balkan](https://medium.com/u/b660a1c6a29b))

Anti-virus: [ClamAV](https://www.clamav.net/)

This has been an indispensable product from a great community and protects both
servers and desktops alike.

### Epilogue

It trust you found my little overview helpful and it is by no means complete. So
feel free to recommend alternatives and in any case I am looking forward to your
comments.

Updated with ad-blockers, social networking, computing hardware as well as
messaging alternative. Tip-of-the-hats to various people who provided valuable
comments and links to alternatives. Keep them coming!

### [Axel Segebrecht](https://medium.com/@axelsegebrecht)

A braver take on digital life. Currently working at
[@bebravernow](http://twitter.com/bebravernow) and
[@CranfieldUni](http://twitter.com/CranfieldUni). All views are my own.

### [be braver.](https://medium.com/be-braver?source=footer_card)

stories about being braver in a digital world.

#bebraver/articles