---
author: "Axel Segebrecht"
date: 2016-11-21
linktitle: My top Chrome extensions to help protect your privacy
menu:
  main:
    parent: 
next: 
prev: 
title: My top Chrome extensions to help protect your privacy
weight: 10
---

# My top Chrome extensions to help protect your privacy
![](My%20top%20Chrome%20extensions%20to%20help%20protect%20your%20privacy/https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*wZmp_0P09953Oye15BFk1Q.png)

With Chrome being the browser of choice for many people, next to old school
Internet Explorer that is, it is easy to pick from a vast marketplace of
extensions (plug-ins). The conundrum is, which one to choose — to protect my
privacy for example? Here are my top extensions to do just that in no particular
order. Your milage may vary and I am neither paid nor otherwise affiliated with
any of the providers of the Chrome extensions listed.

#### Ad and tracker blocking: [ublock
Origin](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/ublock-origin/cjpalhdlnbpafiamejdnhcphjbkeiagm)

Beware of the other extension with the same name, sans the origin bit. Long
story short: you want the Origin version. It is more than just an ad-blocker as
it helps stop other trackers and privacy abusing things. It’s easy to install
(no config needed) and to unblock sites you are experiencing issues with.

*Runner-up: Privacy Badger*

#### Passwords:
[Lastpass](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/lastpass-free-password-ma/hdokiejnpimakedhajhdlcegeplioahd)

Lastpass is a free password safe that makes it easy to keep unique, secure
passwords for your websites as well as encrypted plain text notes. It works well
on mobile also.

*Runner-up: 1Password (requires main app to be installed unlike Lastpass)*

#### Email encryption:
[Virtru](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/virtru-email-encryption/nemmanchfojaehgkbgcfmdiidbopakpp)

Sending email securely is hard and Virtru makes it a doddle to do it well. It
works with GMail and other services and has a handy Chrome extension. Virtru is
free and they cannot see the contents of your secured messages (technically
there is no way). You can send emails that expire and also add an unencrypted
message along with the encrypted bit. Unlike other mechanisms, recipients of
your messages do not need Virtru or any software — a modern web browser
suffices.

*Runner-up: *[GNU Privacy Guard](https://www.gnupg.org/)* (GPG) tools (requires
understanding of keys and recipients to have it all set-up their end too). Apps:
*[Windows](https://www.gpg4win.org/)*, *[Mac](https://gpgtools.org/)*,
*[Linux](https://www.gnupg.org/related_software/frontends.html)*,
*[iOS](https://ipgmail.com/)*, *[Android](https://www.openkeychain.org/apps/)

#### Tracking and malware defence: [Bitdefender Traffic
Light](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/trafficlight/cfnpidifppmenkapgihekkeednfoenal)

While this alone can only go so far, it’s better than not having it. Together
with uBlock Origin and HTTPS Everywhere, you have a good defence and alerting
system to protect your privacy and against malware somewhat. Still, you probably
want to invest into a good anti-virus and malware software, rather than just
leaving it to your browser alone.

*Note: If you are using Web of Trust, please consider that we now know *[they
are selling user
data](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/11/07/browsers_ban_web_of_trust_addon_after_biz_is_caught_selling_its_users_browsing_histories/)*.
Similar to Ad Block, you may want to reconsider your options.*

#### Anti-Snooping: [HTTPS
Everywhere](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/https-everywhere/gcbommkclmclpchllfjekcdonpmejbdp)

Browsing websites via HTTPS (SSL encryption) means only the website you visit
and your browser know where and what you are looking at. If the website is in
the UK, this means that data can get shared with state agencies and is stored
for 12 months. Hence the need for VPNs and proxies if you value your privacy.

#### Search engine:
[DuckDuckGo](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/duckduckgo-for-chrome/bkdgflcldnnnapblkhphbgpggdiikppg)

Unlike Google and Bing, DuckDuckGo (DDG or simply Duck) does not track you. You
can set it as the default search engine or install the extension and use it in
parallel.

#### Proxy switcher:
[SwitchyOmega](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/proxy-switchyomega/padekgcemlokbadohgkifijomclgjgif)

If you prefer to use proxies or cannot use a VPN, this little tool may come in
very handy. You can also set rules easily for specific sites and conditions.

#### Epilogue

What are your favourite extensions that help you keep your privacy protected
online?

Also, be sure to read the companion post on ‘[How to stay safe
online](https://medium.com/be-braver/how-to-stay-safe-online-b85d8d1f3997)’ and
[follow the topic/tweetstorm on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/axelsegebrecht/timelines/800755018240552961).

### [Axel Segebrecht](https://medium.com/@axelsegebrecht)

A braver take on digital life. Currently working at
[@bebravernow](http://twitter.com/bebravernow) and
[@CranfieldUni](http://twitter.com/CranfieldUni). All views are my own.

### [be braver.](https://medium.com/be-braver?source=footer_card)

stories about being braver in a digital world.

#bebraver/articles